# WbFuBusyTable

- Version: V2R2
- Status: OK
- Date: 2025/01/20
- commitï¼š[xxx](https://github.com/OpenXiangShan/XiangShan/tree/xxx)

## Function

The primary function of the WbFuBusyTable module is to manage and synchronize
the interaction between the busy tables of different execution units and
write-back ports.

The main process is as follows:

1. Busy table information from integer, floating-point, vector, and memory
   schedulers is merged by type into a global busy table.
2. Bind the global busy table with execution unit parameters, obtaining the
   maximum latency and deterministic flags (whether the execution latency of
   functional units is deterministic) for each write-back port from the
   parameters, and generate hardware busy tables based on the latency
   configuration.
3. Determine whether the execution unit is connected to the specified write-back
   port based on the type of write-back physical register.
4. Merge the busy status of each execution unit into the busy table of the
   write-back port.
5. Distribute the busy table of write-back ports to the dispatch queues of each
   scheduler.

### Functional Unit Busy Table FuBusyTable

The functional unit busy table records the busy status of each functional unit
at different time points. Only functional units with deterministic latency have
a functional unit busy table, with a bit width equal to the execution latency of
the functional unit. Each bit corresponds to a specific time point, where "1"
indicates the functional unit is busy at that time point, and "0" indicates it
is idle.

### Functional Unit Busy Table Write FuBusyTableWrite

The primary function of the functional unit busy table write is to update the
status of the functional unit busy table. It receives various response signals,
such as the dequeue signal from the dispatch queue (deqResp), the response
signal returned after processing in the og0 stage (og0Resp), and the response
signal returned after processing in the og1 stage (og1Resp). Based on the
validity of these signals and the functional unit type, the busy table is
updated. When an instruction is successfully dispatched, the corresponding bit
in the busy table is set to "1" based on the functional unit type and latency
information in the response signal, indicating the functional unit is busy. When
instruction dispatch fails in the og0 or og1 stage, the corresponding time point
in the busy table is cleared based on the functional unit type and latency
information in the response signal, indicating the functional unit is idle.

### Functional Unit Busy Table Read FuBusyTableRead

The functional unit busy table read generates a mask by processing the busy
table and functional unit type, indicating which instructions can use the
corresponding functional unit.
